CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to Minarrow

Thank you for your interest in contributing to Minarrow! We welcome contributions from the community and appreciate your help!

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Rust 1.89.0-nightly or later
- Git
- Familiarity with Apache Arrow and low-level memory concepts (helpful but not required)

### Setting Up Your Development Environment

1. Fork the repository on GitHub
2. Clone your fork locally:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/minarrow.git
   cd minarrow
   ```
3. Add the upstream repository as a remote:
   ```bash
   git remote add upstream https://github.com/originaluser/minarrow.git
   ```
4. Install dependencies and run tests:
   ```bash
   cargo test
   ```

## Development Workflow

### Making Changes

1. Create a new branch for your feature or bugfix:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
   ```
2. Make your changes, following the coding standards below
3. Add or update tests as appropriate
4. Run the test suite:
   ```bash
   cargo test --all-features
   ```
5. Run clippy for linting:
   ```bash
   cargo clippy --all-features -- -D warnings
   ```
6. Format your code:
   ```bash
   cargo fmt
   ```

### Commit Messages

Please use clear, descriptive commit messages following conventional commit format:

- `feat: add new array type support`
- `fix: resolve memory alignment issue in Vec64`
- `docs: update API documentation for Table`
- `perf: optimise SIMD operations for integer arrays`
- `test: add benchmarks for categorical arrays`

## Coding Standards

### Code Style

- Follow standard Rust formatting (cargo fmt)
- Use meaningful variable and function names
- Keep functions focused and reasonably sized
- Avoid traits and superfluous abstractions unless they genuinely add value - this is particularly important as LLMs will often suggest these unnecessarily
- Ensure modules, structs and functions contain exactly what they say on the tin
- Brief and informative comments are great. Well-named objects are even better!
- Single-responsibility principle - each function should have one clear purpose
- Avoid code duplication through helper functions and macros where appropriate
- At enum match-arms - it is often preferable for maintability to call into dedicated functions rather than inlining logic per type. 
- Avoid overengineering if it is not adding genuine value to the codebase

### Documentation

- All public APIs must have comprehensive documentation
- Use doc comments (`///`) for public functions, structs, and modules
- Include examples in documentation where helpful:
  ```rust
  /// Creates a new IntegerArray from a vector of values.
  ///
  /// # Examples
  ///
  /// ```
  /// use minarrow::IntegerArray;
  /// let array = IntegerArray::from_vec(vec![1, 2, 3]);
  /// assert_eq!(array.len(), 3);
  /// ```
  pub fn from_vec(values: Vec<T>) -> Self { ... }
  ```

### Testing

- Write unit tests for all new functionality
- Include edge cases and error conditions
- Use property-based testing where appropriate
- Benchmark performance-critical code changes
- Test with both default and all features enabled

### Error Handling

- Use `Result<T, E>` for fallible operations
- Create specific error types rather than using strings
- Provide helpful error messages
- Document error conditions in function documentation

## Types of Contributions

### Priority Areas

We particularly welcome contributions in these areas:

#### 1. Connectors
- File format support
- CSV readers/writers optimised for Minarrow types
- Database connectors (PostgreSQL, ClickHouse, etc.)
- Cloud storage integrations (S3, GCS, Azure)
- Message queue integrations (Kafka, Pulsar)

#### 2. Optimisations
- SIMD kernel improvements
- Memory usage optimisations
- Parallel processing enhancements
- Cache-friendly algorithms

#### 3. PyO3 Integration
- Python bindings for core types
- NumPy integration
- Pandas interoperability
- AsyncIO support for streaming operations

#### 4. Extended Type Support
- List array implementations
- Struct array implementations
- Union types
- Additional temporal types

To help ensure the `Array` data structure remains performant, please kindly:
- `Box< >` any entries for nested types, as enums reserve memory equal to their
largest type
- Feature flag new entries, to avoid impacting downstream codebases. 

### Breaking changes

**Please do not introduce breaking changes**. This is particularly important given
today's developer community reliance on LLM's, where users impacted by seemingly small changes means the AI gets it wrong for the next 2+ years until the next major release.

### Bug Fixes

When reporting bugs:
- Use the GitHub issue template
- Include minimal reproduction cases
- Specify Rust version and target platform
- Include relevant feature flags

When fixing bugs:
- Add regression tests
- Update documentation if the fix changes behaviour
- Reference the issue number in your commit message

## Code Review Process

### Pull Request Guidelines

1. **Before submitting:**
   - Ensure all tests pass
   - Update documentation
   - Add changelog entry if applicable
   - Rebase on latest main branch

2. **Pull request description should include:**
   - Clear description of changes
   - Motivation for the changes
   - Testing performed
   - Breaking changes (if any)
   - Related issue numbers

3. **Review process:**
   - All PRs currently require approval from Peter Bower.
   - PR's will be reviewed within 7 days (usually sooner).
   - Address feedback promptly
   - Maintain discussion in PR comments

4. **Licensing**
    - Please ensure no code is copied or pulled from other repositories,
    including MIT-licensed ones. This is to help ensure the codebase
    remains license-compliant, as even Apache-Licensed projects can
    experience legal challenges.

### Review Criteria

Reviewers will evaluate:

- **Correctness**: Does the code work as intended?
- **Performance**: Are there performance implications?
- **API Design**: Is the API intuitive and consistent?
- **Safety**: Does the code follow Rust safety principles?
- **Testing**: Are tests adequate and comprehensive?
- **Documentation**: Is the code well-documented?

### Maintainer status
Regular high-quality contributions is likely to result in you being
granted maintainer status, with the ability to also approve PR's,
and contribute to the crate's direction.

## Performance Considerations

### Benchmarking

- Use `cargo bench` for performance testing
- Include baseline comparisons where relevant
- Test with realistic data sizes
- Consider both single-threaded and parallel scenarios

### Memory Management

- Maintain 64-byte alignment guarantees
- Minimise allocations in hot paths
- Use zero-copy operations except on trivial metadata fields
- Profile memory usage for large datasets

### SIMD Optimisation

- Ensure algorithms work with aligned data
- Test on multiple CPU architectures when possible
- Provide fallback implementations for unsupported features
- Document SIMD requirements clearly

## Feature Flags

When adding new features:

- Use feature flags for optional functionality
- Document feature dependencies clearly
- Ensure core functionality works without optional features
- Update CI to test relevant feature combinations

Example feature flag usage:
```rust
#[cfg(feature = "advanced_types")]
pub mod advanced {
    // Advanced type implementations
}
```

## Release Process

### Versioning

We follow Semantic Versioning (SemVer):
- Major version: Breaking changes
- Minor version: New features, backwards compatible
- Patch version: Bug fixes, backwards compatible

### Changelog

Update `CHANGELOG.md` with:
- New features
- Bug fixes
- Breaking changes
- Performance improvements
- Deprecations

## Community Guidelines

### Code of Conduct

- Be respectful and inclusive
- Focus on constructive feedback
- Help newcomers learn and contribute
- Assume good intentions

### Communication

- Use GitHub issues for bug reports and feature requests
- Join discussions in pull request comments
- Ask questions if you're unsure about anything
- Share knowledge and help others

See `CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md`.

## Getting Help

If you need assistance:

1. Check existing documentation and issues
2. Ask questions in GitHub discussions
3. Reach out to maintainers for guidance
4. Join community channels (if available)

## Recognition

Contributors will be recognised in:
- `CONTRIBUTORS.md` file
- Release notes for significant contributions
- Project documentation where appropriate

Thank you for contributing to Minarrow! Your efforts help make high-performance data processing more accessible to the Rust community.

Commit message:

test: Add unit tests workflow

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to Minarrow

Thank you for your interest in contributing to Minarrow! We welcome contributions from the community and appreciate your help!

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Rust 1.89.0-nightly or later
- Git
- Familiarity with Apache Arrow and low-level memory concepts (helpful but not required)

### Setting Up Your Development Environment

1. Fork the repository on GitHub
2. Clone your fork locally:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/minarrow.git
   cd minarrow
   ```
3. Add the upstream repository as a remote:
   ```bash
   git remote add upstream https://github.com/originaluser/minarrow.git
   ```
4. Install dependencies and run tests:
   ```bash
   cargo test
   ```

## Development Workflow

### Making Changes

1. Create a new branch for your feature or bugfix:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
   ```
2. Make your changes, following the coding standards below
3. Add or update tests as appropriate
4. Run the test suite:
   ```bash
   cargo test --all-features
   ```
or, for exhaustive feature-flag checks (requires cargo install cargo-all-features):
   ```base
   cargo test-all-features
   ```
The second form is recommended for changes that may affect multiple features.
It tests combinations of up to two feature flags and takes about five minutes.

5. Run clippy for linting:
   ```bash
   cargo clippy --all-features -- -D warnings
   ```
6. Format your code:
   ```bash
   cargo fmt
   ```

### Commit Messages

Please use clear, descriptive commit messages following conventional commit format:

- `feat: add new array type support`
- `fix: resolve memory alignment issue in Vec64`
- `docs: update API documentation for Table`
- `perf: optimise SIMD operations for integer arrays`
- `test: add benchmarks for categorical arrays`

## Coding Standards

### Code Style

- Follow standard Rust formatting (cargo fmt)
- Use meaningful variable and function names
- Keep functions focused and reasonably sized
- Avoid traits and superfluous abstractions unless they genuinely add value - this is particularly important as LLMs will often suggest these unnecessarily
- Ensure modules, structs and functions contain exactly what they say on the tin
- Brief and informative comments are great. Well-named objects are even better!
- Single-responsibility principle - each function should have one clear purpose
- Avoid code duplication through helper functions and macros where appropriate
- At enum match-arms - it is often preferable for maintability to call into dedicated functions rather than inlining logic per type. 
- Avoid overengineering if it is not adding genuine value to the codebase

### Documentation

- All public APIs must have comprehensive documentation
- Use doc comments (`///`) for public functions, structs, and modules
- Include examples in documentation where helpful:
  ```rust
  /// Creates a new IntegerArray from a vector of values.
  ///
  /// # Examples
  ///
  /// ```
  /// use minarrow::IntegerArray;
  /// let array = IntegerArray::from_vec(vec![1, 2, 3]);
  /// assert_eq!(array.len(), 3);
  /// ```
  pub fn from_vec(values: Vec<T>) -> Self { ... }
  ```

### Testing

- Write unit tests for all new functionality
- Include edge cases and error conditions
- Use property-based testing where appropriate
- Benchmark performance-critical code changes
- Test with both default and all features enabled

### Error Handling

- Use `Result<T, E>` for fallible operations
- Create specific error types rather than using strings
- Provide helpful error messages
- Document error conditions in function documentation

## Types of Contributions

### Priority Areas

We particularly welcome contributions in these areas:

#### 1. Connectors
- File format support
- CSV readers/writers optimised for Minarrow types
- Database connectors (PostgreSQL, ClickHouse, etc.)
- Cloud storage integrations (S3, GCS, Azure)
- Message queue integrations (Kafka, Pulsar)

#### 2. Optimisations
- SIMD kernel improvements
- Memory usage optimisations
- Parallel processing enhancements
- Cache-friendly algorithms

#### 3. PyO3 Integration
- Python bindings for core types
- NumPy integration
- Pandas interoperability
- AsyncIO support for streaming operations

#### 4. Extended Type Support
- List array implementations
- Struct array implementations
- Union types
- Additional temporal types

To help ensure the `Array` data structure remains performant, please kindly:
- `Box< >` any entries for nested types, as enums reserve memory equal to their
largest type
- Feature flag new entries, to avoid impacting downstream codebases. 

### Breaking changes

**Please do not introduce breaking changes**. This is particularly important given
today's developer community reliance on LLM's, where users impacted by seemingly small changes means the AI gets it wrong for the next 2+ years until the next major release.

### Bug Fixes

When reporting bugs:
- Use the GitHub issue template
- Include minimal reproduction cases
- Specify Rust version and target platform
- Include relevant feature flags

When fixing bugs:
- Add regression tests
- Update documentation if the fix changes behaviour
- Reference the issue number in your commit message

## Code Review Process

### Pull Request Guidelines

1. **Before submitting:**
   - Ensure all tests pass
   - Update documentation
   - Add changelog entry if applicable
   - Rebase on latest main branch

2. **Pull request description should include:**
   - Clear description of changes
   - Motivation for the changes
   - Testing performed
   - Breaking changes (if any)
   - Related issue numbers

3. **Review process:**
   - All PRs currently require approval from Peter Bower.
   - PR's will be reviewed within 7 days (usually sooner).
   - Address feedback promptly
   - Maintain discussion in PR comments

4. **Licensing**
    - Please ensure no code is copied or pulled from other repositories,
    including MIT-licensed ones. This is to help ensure the codebase
    remains license-compliant, as even Apache-Licensed projects can
    experience legal challenges.

### Review Criteria

Reviewers will evaluate:

- **Correctness**: Does the code work as intended?
- **Performance**: Are there performance implications?
- **API Design**: Is the API intuitive and consistent?
- **Safety**: Does the code follow Rust safety principles?
- **Testing**: Are tests adequate and comprehensive?
- **Documentation**: Is the code well-documented?

### Maintainer status
Regular high-quality contributions is likely to result in you being
granted maintainer status, with the ability to also approve PR's,
and contribute to the crate's direction.

## Performance Considerations

### Benchmarking

- Use `cargo bench` for performance testing
- Include baseline comparisons where relevant
- Test with realistic data sizes
- Consider both single-threaded and parallel scenarios

### Memory Management

- Maintain 64-byte alignment guarantees
- Minimise allocations in hot paths
- Use zero-copy operations except on trivial metadata fields
- Profile memory usage for large datasets

### SIMD Optimisation

- Ensure algorithms work with aligned data
- Test on multiple CPU architectures when possible
- Provide fallback implementations for unsupported features
- Document SIMD requirements clearly

## Feature Flags

When adding new features:

- Use feature flags for optional functionality
- Document feature dependencies clearly
- Ensure core functionality works without optional features
- Update CI to test relevant feature combinations

Example feature flag usage:
```rust
#[cfg(feature = "advanced_types")]
pub mod advanced {
    // Advanced type implementations
}
```

## Release Process

### Versioning

We follow Semantic Versioning (SemVer):
- Major version: Breaking changes
- Minor version: New features, backwards compatible
- Patch version: Bug fixes, backwards compatible

### Changelog

Update `CHANGELOG.md` with:
- New features
- Bug fixes
- Breaking changes
- Performance improvements
- Deprecations

## Community Guidelines

### Code of Conduct

- Be respectful and inclusive
- Focus on constructive feedback
- Help newcomers learn and contribute
- Assume good intentions

### Communication

- Use GitHub issues for bug reports and feature requests
- Join discussions in pull request comments
- Ask questions if you're unsure about anything
- Share knowledge and help others

See `CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md`.

## Getting Help

If you need assistance:

1. Check existing documentation and issues
2. Ask questions in GitHub discussions
3. Reach out to maintainers for guidance
4. Join community channels (if available)

## Recognition

Contributors will be recognised in:
- `CONTRIBUTORS.md` file
- Release notes for significant contributions
- Project documentation where appropriate

Thank you for contributing to Minarrow! Your efforts help make high-performance data processing more accessible to the Rust community.
