pyo3/README.md, before:

# minarrow-pyo3

PyO3 bindings for MinArrow - zero-copy Arrow interop with Python via the Arrow PyCapsule and C Data Interfaces.

## Overview

This crate provides transparent wrapper types that enable straightforward conversion between MinArrow's Rust types and Python Arrow-compatible types. Any library supporting the Arrow PyCapsule protocol works out of the box: PyArrow, Polars, DuckDB, nanoarrow, pandas with ArrowDtype, etc.

## Container Type Mappings

MinArrow calls an object with a header, rows and columns a "Table" favouring broader matter-of-factness. Apache Arrow calls it a "RecordBatch" in line with the Apache Arrow standard, whereby a "Table" (at least in PyArrow) is considered a chunked composition of those RecordBatches, for a more highly engineered approach. Below is how they map to one another for the equivalent memory and object layout.

| MinArrow | PyArrow | Wrapper Type | Protocol |
|----------|---------|--------------|----------|
| `Array` | `pa.Array` | `PyArray` | `__arrow_c_array__` |
| `Table` | `pa.RecordBatch` | `PyRecordBatch` | `__arrow_c_stream__` (one batch) |
| `SuperTable` | `pa.Table` | `PyTable` | `__arrow_c_stream__` (multiple batches) |
| `SuperArray` | `pa.ChunkedArray` | `PyChunkedArray` | `__arrow_c_stream__` (one array per chunk) |

## Array Data Type Mappings

Each inner MinArrow array type maps 1:1 to a specific PyArrow typed array. The Arrow C Data Interface preserves schema metadata so PyArrow reconstructs the correct type on import.

### Numeric types

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `IntegerArray<i32>` | `NumericArray::Int32` | `i` | `pa.Int32Array` |
| `IntegerArray<i64>` | `NumericArray::Int64` | `l` | `pa.Int64Array` |
| `IntegerArray<u32>` | `NumericArray::UInt32` | `I` | `pa.UInt32Array` |
| `IntegerArray<u64>` | `NumericArray::UInt64` | `L` | `pa.UInt64Array` |
| `FloatArray<f32>` | `NumericArray::Float32` | `f` | `pa.FloatArray` |
| `FloatArray<f64>` | `NumericArray::Float64` | `g` | `pa.DoubleArray` |

### Extended numeric types (feature `extended_numeric_types`)

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `IntegerArray<i8>` | `NumericArray::Int8` | `c` | `pa.Int8Array` |
| `IntegerArray<i16>` | `NumericArray::Int16` | `s` | `pa.Int16Array` |
| `IntegerArray<u8>` | `NumericArray::UInt8` | `C` | `pa.UInt8Array` |
| `IntegerArray<u16>` | `NumericArray::UInt16` | `S` | `pa.UInt16Array` |

### Boolean

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `BooleanArray` | `Array::BooleanArray` | `b` | `pa.BooleanArray` |

### Text types

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `StringArray<u32>` | `TextArray::String32` | `u` | `pa.StringArray` |
| `StringArray<u64>` | `TextArray::String64` | `U` | `pa.LargeStringArray` |

### Temporal types (feature `datetime`)

MinArrow stores temporal data in `DatetimeArray<i32>` or `DatetimeArray<i64>` with a `TimeUnit` discriminator. The Arrow type is determined by the `ArrowType` in the `Field`, not the storage type alone.

| MinArrow inner type | `ArrowType` | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------|--------------|--------------|
| `DatetimeArray<i32>` | `Date32` | `tdD` | `pa.Date32Array` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Date64` | `tdm` | `pa.Date64Array` |
| `DatetimeArray<i32>` | `Time32(Seconds)` | `tts` | `pa.Time32Array` |
| `DatetimeArray<i32>` | `Time32(Milliseconds)` | `ttm` | `pa.Time32Array` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Time64(Microseconds)` | `ttu` | `pa.Time64Array` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Time64(Nanoseconds)` | `ttn` | `pa.Time64Array` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Timestamp(Seconds, tz)` | `tss:tz` | `pa.TimestampArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Timestamp(Milliseconds, tz)` | `tsm:tz` | `pa.TimestampArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Timestamp(Microseconds, tz)` | `tsu:tz` | `pa.TimestampArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Timestamp(Nanoseconds, tz)` | `tsn:tz` | `pa.TimestampArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i32>` | `Duration32(Seconds)` | `tDs` | `pa.DurationArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i32>` | `Duration32(Milliseconds)` | `tDm` | `pa.DurationArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Duration64(Microseconds)` | `tDu` | `pa.DurationArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Duration64(Nanoseconds)` | `tDn` | `pa.DurationArray` |

Timezone metadata for timestamps is preserved via the Arrow schema format string.

### Categorical / dictionary types

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `CategoricalArray<u32>` | `TextArray::Categorical32` | dictionary(int32, utf8) | `pa.DictionaryArray` |

With feature `extended_categorical` + `extended_numeric_types`:

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `CategoricalArray<u8>` | `TextArray::Categorical8` | dictionary(int8, utf8) | `pa.DictionaryArray` |
| `CategoricalArray<u16>` | `TextArray::Categorical16` | dictionary(int16, utf8) | `pa.DictionaryArray` |

With feature `extended_categorical`:

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `CategoricalArray<u64>` | `TextArray::Categorical64` | dictionary(int64, utf8) | `pa.DictionaryArray` |

### Nullability

All array types support null values via MinArrow's `MaskedArray` wrapper. The validity bitmap is transferred through the Arrow C Data Interface and PyArrow reconstructs the same null positions on import.

## Conversion Path

Inner array types like `IntegerArray<T>` are not exported directly. They must first be wrapped in the `Array` enum via a factory method, then paired with a `Field` to form a `FieldArray`:

```text
IntegerArray<i64>
  -> Array::from_int64(arr)          // wraps in NumericArray::Int64(Arc<IntegerArray<i64>>)
  -> FieldArray::new(field, array)   // pairs with schema metadata
  -> PyArray                         // wrapper implementing PyO3 traits
  -> export_to_c / PyCapsule        // Arrow C Data Interface export
```

The `Array::from_*` factory methods wrap inner arrays in `Arc`, so subsequent clones of the `Array` enum only increment reference counts - the underlying buffer is never copied. The FFI `Holder` struct stores this `Arc<Array>` in its `private_data` field, keeping the buffer alive until the consumer calls `release()`.

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.9+
- PyArrow 14+
- Rust nightly (for MinArrow)
- maturin

```bash
pip install maturin pyarrow
```

### Building

```bash
cd pyo3
maturin develop --all-features
```

For a release build:
```bash
maturin build --release --all-features
```

## Usage

### Rust Side

Create PyO3 functions that accept and return PyArrow types:

```rust
use minarrow_pyo3::{PyArray, PyRecordBatch};
use minarrow::{Array, Table, IntegerArray, MaskedArray};
use pyo3::prelude::*;

#[pyfunction]
fn double_values(input: PyArray) -> PyResult<PyArray> {
    let array = input.inner();
    // Process... (example: clone and return)
    Ok(PyArray::from(array.clone()))
}

#[pyfunction]
fn process_batch(input: PyRecordBatch) -> PyResult<PyRecordBatch> {
    let table: Table = input.into();
    // Process the table...
    Ok(PyRecordBatch::from(table))
}

#[pymodule]
fn my_extension(m: &Bound<'_, PyModule>) -> PyResult<()> {
    m.add_function(wrap_pyfunction!(double_values, m)?)?;
    m.add_function(wrap_pyfunction!(process_batch, m)?)?;
    Ok(())
}
```

### Python Side

```python
import pyarrow as pa
import my_extension

# Array roundtrip
arr = pa.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5], type=pa.int32())
result = my_extension.double_values(arr)
print(result)  # PyArrow array

# RecordBatch roundtrip
batch = pa.RecordBatch.from_pydict({
    "id": [1, 2, 3],
    "name": ["alpha", "beta", "gamma"]
})
result = my_extension.process_batch(batch)
print(result)  # PyArrow RecordBatch
```

## Features

- `datetime` - Enable datetime/temporal type support (Date32, Date64, Timestamp, Duration, Time32, Time64)
- `extended_numeric_types` - Enable i8, i16, u8, u16 types
- `extended_categorical` - Enable Categorical8, Categorical16, Categorical64

All features are enabled by default.

## Testing

### Python tests (20 tests, both directions)

Tests all types as Rust -> Python -> Rust roundtrips via PyArrow:

```bash
cd pyo3
maturin develop --all-features
.venv/bin/python tests/test_roundtrip.py
```

### Rust tests (48 tests, both directions)

Tests all types atomically in both directions - Rust -> Python -> Rust roundtrips, and separate Python -> Rust imports via the PyCapsule protocol:

```bash
cd pyo3

# PYO3_PYTHON MUST be an absolute path - relative paths fail in cargo build scripts.
# Run cargo clean first if you previously built against a different Python or venv,
# because PyO3 caches the Python path in build artefacts.

PYO3_PYTHON=$(pwd)/.venv/bin/python \
  PYTHONHOME=/usr \
  PYTHONPATH=$(pwd)/.venv/lib/python3.12/site-packages \
  LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu \
  cargo run --example atomic_tests \
    --no-default-features \
    --features "datetime,extended_numeric_types,extended_categorical"
```

The `--no-default-features` disables `extension-module`, allowing the binary to link against libpython for standalone execution. `PYO3_PYTHON` must be an absolute path to the venv Python. `PYTHONHOME` must match your system Python prefix. `PYTHONPATH` must include the venv site-packages.

### PyCapsule examples

Python demo showing PyCapsule consumption by PyArrow, nanoarrow, and Polars:

```bash
cd pyo3
maturin develop --all-features
.venv/bin/python examples/pycapsule_demo.py
```

Rust demo showing PyCapsule export and import with an embedded Python interpreter:

```bash
cd pyo3

PYO3_PYTHON=$(pwd)/.venv/bin/python \
  PYTHONHOME=/usr \
  PYTHONPATH=$(pwd)/.venv/lib/python3.12/site-packages \
  LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu \
  cargo run --example pycapsule_exchange \
    --no-default-features \
    --features "datetime,extended_numeric_types,extended_categorical"
```

## Architecture

The bindings use two exchange protocols:

1. **Arrow PyCapsule Interface** - the standard `__arrow_c_array__` / `__arrow_c_stream__` protocol. Import functions try this first. Works with any Arrow-compatible Python library.

2. **Legacy `_export_to_c`** - PyArrow-specific fallback using raw pointer integers for older PyArrow versions.

Memory is managed through Arc reference counting. The Arrow release callbacks ensure the Rust-side buffers remain alive until the consumer is done with them. Buffer data is not copied during FFI transfer, however (relatively cheap) Field metadata is.

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Update Categorical zero copy for PyCapsule

pyo3/README.md, after:

# minarrow-pyo3

PyO3 bindings for MinArrow - zero-copy Arrow interop with Python via the Arrow PyCapsule and C Data Interfaces.

## Overview

This crate provides transparent wrapper types that enable straightforward conversion between MinArrow's Rust types and Python Arrow-compatible types. Any library supporting the Arrow PyCapsule protocol works out of the box: PyArrow, Polars, DuckDB, nanoarrow, pandas with ArrowDtype, etc.

## Container Type Mappings

MinArrow calls an object with a header, rows and columns a "Table" favouring broader matter-of-factness. Apache Arrow calls it a "RecordBatch" in line with the Apache Arrow standard, whereby a "Table" (at least in PyArrow) is considered a chunked composition of those RecordBatches, for a more highly engineered approach. Below is how they map to one another for the equivalent memory and object layout.

| MinArrow | PyArrow | Wrapper Type | Protocol |
|----------|---------|--------------|----------|
| `Array` | `pa.Array` | `PyArray` | `__arrow_c_array__` |
| `Table` | `pa.RecordBatch` | `PyRecordBatch` | `__arrow_c_stream__` (one batch) |
| `SuperTable` | `pa.Table` | `PyTable` | `__arrow_c_stream__` (multiple batches) |
| `SuperArray` | `pa.ChunkedArray` | `PyChunkedArray` | `__arrow_c_stream__` (one array per chunk) |

## Array Data Type Mappings

Each inner MinArrow array type maps 1:1 to a specific PyArrow typed array. The Arrow C Data Interface preserves schema metadata so PyArrow reconstructs the correct type on import.

### Numeric types

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `IntegerArray<i32>` | `NumericArray::Int32` | `i` | `pa.Int32Array` |
| `IntegerArray<i64>` | `NumericArray::Int64` | `l` | `pa.Int64Array` |
| `IntegerArray<u32>` | `NumericArray::UInt32` | `I` | `pa.UInt32Array` |
| `IntegerArray<u64>` | `NumericArray::UInt64` | `L` | `pa.UInt64Array` |
| `FloatArray<f32>` | `NumericArray::Float32` | `f` | `pa.FloatArray` |
| `FloatArray<f64>` | `NumericArray::Float64` | `g` | `pa.DoubleArray` |

### Extended numeric types (feature `extended_numeric_types`)

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `IntegerArray<i8>` | `NumericArray::Int8` | `c` | `pa.Int8Array` |
| `IntegerArray<i16>` | `NumericArray::Int16` | `s` | `pa.Int16Array` |
| `IntegerArray<u8>` | `NumericArray::UInt8` | `C` | `pa.UInt8Array` |
| `IntegerArray<u16>` | `NumericArray::UInt16` | `S` | `pa.UInt16Array` |

### Boolean

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `BooleanArray` | `Array::BooleanArray` | `b` | `pa.BooleanArray` |

### Text types

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `StringArray<u32>` | `TextArray::String32` | `u` | `pa.StringArray` |
| `StringArray<u64>` | `TextArray::String64` | `U` | `pa.LargeStringArray` |

### Temporal types (feature `datetime`)

MinArrow stores temporal data in `DatetimeArray<i32>` or `DatetimeArray<i64>` with a `TimeUnit` discriminator. The Arrow type is determined by the `ArrowType` in the `Field`, not the storage type alone.

| MinArrow inner type | `ArrowType` | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------|--------------|--------------|
| `DatetimeArray<i32>` | `Date32` | `tdD` | `pa.Date32Array` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Date64` | `tdm` | `pa.Date64Array` |
| `DatetimeArray<i32>` | `Time32(Seconds)` | `tts` | `pa.Time32Array` |
| `DatetimeArray<i32>` | `Time32(Milliseconds)` | `ttm` | `pa.Time32Array` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Time64(Microseconds)` | `ttu` | `pa.Time64Array` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Time64(Nanoseconds)` | `ttn` | `pa.Time64Array` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Timestamp(Seconds, tz)` | `tss:tz` | `pa.TimestampArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Timestamp(Milliseconds, tz)` | `tsm:tz` | `pa.TimestampArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Timestamp(Microseconds, tz)` | `tsu:tz` | `pa.TimestampArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Timestamp(Nanoseconds, tz)` | `tsn:tz` | `pa.TimestampArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i32>` | `Duration32(Seconds)` | `tDs` | `pa.DurationArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i32>` | `Duration32(Milliseconds)` | `tDm` | `pa.DurationArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Duration64(Microseconds)` | `tDu` | `pa.DurationArray` |
| `DatetimeArray<i64>` | `Duration64(Nanoseconds)` | `tDn` | `pa.DurationArray` |

Timezone metadata for timestamps is preserved via the Arrow schema format string.

### Categorical / dictionary types

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `CategoricalArray<u32>` | `TextArray::Categorical32` | dictionary(int32, utf8) | `pa.DictionaryArray` |

With feature `extended_categorical` + `extended_numeric_types`:

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `CategoricalArray<u8>` | `TextArray::Categorical8` | dictionary(int8, utf8) | `pa.DictionaryArray` |
| `CategoricalArray<u16>` | `TextArray::Categorical16` | dictionary(int16, utf8) | `pa.DictionaryArray` |

With feature `extended_categorical`:

| MinArrow inner type | `Array` enum path | Arrow format | PyArrow type |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------|--------------|
| `CategoricalArray<u64>` | `TextArray::Categorical64` | dictionary(int64, utf8) | `pa.DictionaryArray` |

For categorical types, the integer buffer is zero-copy but we clone the (finite) dictionary categories.
Unless you have a very large unique category count, this should not cause performance issues.

### Nullability

All array types support null values via MinArrow's `MaskedArray` wrapper. The validity bitmap is transferred through the Arrow C Data Interface and PyArrow reconstructs the same null positions on import.

## Conversion Path

Inner array types like `IntegerArray<T>` are not exported directly. They must first be wrapped in the `Array` enum via a factory method, then paired with a `Field` to form a `FieldArray`:

```text
IntegerArray<i64>
  -> Array::from_int64(arr)          // wraps in NumericArray::Int64(Arc<IntegerArray<i64>>)
  -> FieldArray::new(field, array)   // pairs with schema metadata
  -> PyArray                         // wrapper implementing PyO3 traits
  -> export_to_c / PyCapsule        // Arrow C Data Interface export
```

The `Array::from_*` factory methods wrap inner arrays in `Arc`, so subsequent clones of the `Array` enum only increment reference counts - the underlying buffer is never copied. The FFI `Holder` struct stores this `Arc<Array>` in its `private_data` field, keeping the buffer alive until the consumer calls `release()`.

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.9+
- PyArrow 14+
- Rust nightly (for MinArrow)
- maturin

```bash
pip install maturin pyarrow
```

### Building

```bash
cd pyo3
maturin develop --all-features
```

For a release build:
```bash
maturin build --release --all-features
```

## Usage

### Rust Side

Create PyO3 functions that accept and return PyArrow types:

```rust
use minarrow_pyo3::{PyArray, PyRecordBatch};
use minarrow::{Array, Table, IntegerArray, MaskedArray};
use pyo3::prelude::*;

#[pyfunction]
fn double_values(input: PyArray) -> PyResult<PyArray> {
    let array = input.inner();
    // Process... (example: clone and return)
    Ok(PyArray::from(array.clone()))
}

#[pyfunction]
fn process_batch(input: PyRecordBatch) -> PyResult<PyRecordBatch> {
    let table: Table = input.into();
    // Process the table...
    Ok(PyRecordBatch::from(table))
}

#[pymodule]
fn my_extension(m: &Bound<'_, PyModule>) -> PyResult<()> {
    m.add_function(wrap_pyfunction!(double_values, m)?)?;
    m.add_function(wrap_pyfunction!(process_batch, m)?)?;
    Ok(())
}
```

### Python Side

```python
import pyarrow as pa
import my_extension

# Array roundtrip
arr = pa.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5], type=pa.int32())
result = my_extension.double_values(arr)
print(result)  # PyArrow array

# RecordBatch roundtrip
batch = pa.RecordBatch.from_pydict({
    "id": [1, 2, 3],
    "name": ["alpha", "beta", "gamma"]
})
result = my_extension.process_batch(batch)
print(result)  # PyArrow RecordBatch
```

## Features

- `datetime` - Enable datetime/temporal type support (Date32, Date64, Timestamp, Duration, Time32, Time64)
- `extended_numeric_types` - Enable i8, i16, u8, u16 types
- `extended_categorical` - Enable Categorical8, Categorical16, Categorical64

All features are enabled by default.

## Testing

### Python tests (20 tests, both directions)

Tests all types as Rust -> Python -> Rust roundtrips via PyArrow:

```bash
cd pyo3
maturin develop --all-features
.venv/bin/python tests/test_roundtrip.py
```

### Rust tests (48 tests, both directions)

Tests all types atomically in both directions - Rust -> Python -> Rust roundtrips, and separate Python -> Rust imports via the PyCapsule protocol:

```bash
cd pyo3

# PYO3_PYTHON MUST be an absolute path - relative paths fail in cargo build scripts.
# Run cargo clean first if you previously built against a different Python or venv,
# because PyO3 caches the Python path in build artefacts.

PYO3_PYTHON=$(pwd)/.venv/bin/python \
  PYTHONHOME=/usr \
  PYTHONPATH=$(pwd)/.venv/lib/python3.12/site-packages \
  LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu \
  cargo run --example atomic_tests \
    --no-default-features \
    --features "datetime,extended_numeric_types,extended_categorical"
```

The `--no-default-features` disables `extension-module`, allowing the binary to link against libpython for standalone execution. `PYO3_PYTHON` must be an absolute path to the venv Python. `PYTHONHOME` must match your system Python prefix. `PYTHONPATH` must include the venv site-packages.

### PyCapsule examples

Python demo showing PyCapsule consumption by PyArrow, nanoarrow, and Polars:

```bash
cd pyo3
maturin develop --all-features
.venv/bin/python examples/pycapsule_demo.py
```

Rust demo showing PyCapsule export and import with an embedded Python interpreter:

```bash
cd pyo3

PYO3_PYTHON=$(pwd)/.venv/bin/python \
  PYTHONHOME=/usr \
  PYTHONPATH=$(pwd)/.venv/lib/python3.12/site-packages \
  LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu \
  cargo run --example pycapsule_exchange \
    --no-default-features \
    --features "datetime,extended_numeric_types,extended_categorical"
```

## Architecture

The bindings use two exchange protocols:

1. **Arrow PyCapsule Interface** - the standard `__arrow_c_array__` / `__arrow_c_stream__` protocol. Import functions try this first. Works with any Arrow-compatible Python library.

2. **`_export_to_c`** - PyArrow-specific fallback using raw pointer integers for older PyArrow versions.

Memory is managed through Arc reference counting. The Arrow release callbacks ensure the Rust-side buffers remain alive until the consumer is done with them.

## Copy Semantics

### Zero-copy

All primary data buffers are transferred without copying in both directions. This applies to all export paths, single array imports, ChunkedArray chunk imports, and RecordBatch/Table column imports via both the PyCapsule stream and legacy `_import_from_c` paths.

### Copied

The following are copied during import because they require structural transformation between MinArrow and Arrow representations:

- **Null bitmasks** — reconstructed into MinArrow's `Bitmask` type on import. These are small: ceil(N/8) bytes for N elements.
- **String offsets** — Minarrow currently uses `Vec64<T>` rather than `Buffer<T>` for storing offsets. This will be rectified in a future upgrade to support zero-copy, and is a temporary hangover from an earlier data model.
- **Categorical dictionary strings** — Arrow stores dictionaries as contiguous offsets+data; MinArrow stores them as `Vec64<String>` with individual heap allocations (as for a categorical data use case, a relatively small number of categories is the norm). The integer codes buffer is zero-copy, which is the instances within the (potentially large) dataset.

- **Field metadata** — names, types, and flags are lightweight and always copied.

## License

MIT
